docs(widgets) Custom Widget Developer Guide (#9304)
visgl/deck.gl: docs/developer-guide/custom-widgets/universal-widgets.md

The widget lifecycle functions define how a widget initializes, updates, and cleans up its integration with deck.gl.

### Adding a Widget

[`onAdd({deck, viewId}): HTMLElement?`](../../api-reference/core/widget.md#onadd) - This method provides deck.gl with the root DOM element of your widget. This element is positioned based on `placement` and `viewId` members.

```ts
import { type Widget } from '@deck.gl/core'

class AwesomeWidget implements Widget {
  onAdd({ deck, viewId }) {
    const element = document.createElement('div');
    // Initialize and style your element
    return element
  }
}
```

### Updating Properties

[`setProps(props)`](../../api-reference/core/widget.md#setprops) - This method is called whenever widget properties are updated. Use this to apply changes dynamically.

```ts
class AwesomeWidget implements Widget {
  setProps(props: Partial<ZoomWidgetProps>) {
    Object.assign(this.props, props);
  }
}
```

### Handling Viewport Changes

[`onViewportChange(viewport: Viewport)`](../../api-reference/core/widget.md#onviewportchange) - Widgets can listen to viewport updates via the `onViewportChange` method. You can target specific viewports or listen to all. 

> 

Reviewer: - Maybe make it clear that the "targeting" of viewports is done by setting viewId. 
- Does "you" mean widget writer or widget user (suggestion is to write it out).

Reviewer: Yes. I guess a list of viewIds would be a possible extension, right now it is one or all...

Specific viewport:

```ts
class AwesomeWidget implements Widget {
  viewId = 'minimap'

  onViewportChange(viewport: Viewport) {
    // Handle updates for the "minimap" viewport
  }
}
```

All viewports:

```ts
class AwesomeWidget implements Widget {
  viewId = null

  onViewportChange(viewport: Viewport) {
    // Handle updates for all viewports
  }
}
```

### Redrawing Widget

> [`onRedraw({viewports, layers})`] - This method is invoked during rendering. This is useful for responding to changes in layers or viewports, such as a `HeatmapLayer`'s `colorRange` prop.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[`onRedraw({viewports, layers})`] - This method is invoked when deck.gl performs rendering. This is useful for updating the widget UI to correspond to changes in layers or viewports, such as a `HeatmapLayer`'s `colorRange` prop.
```

```ts
class AwesomeWidget implements Widget {
  onRedraw({ viewports, layers }) {
    // Update widget visuals
  }
}
```

### Removing Widget

[`onRemove()`](../../api-reference/core/widget.md#onremove) - If implemented, this method is called when your widget is removed. This is a good time to clean up resources.

```ts
class AwesomeWidget implements Widget {
  onRemove() {
    // Cleanup code
  }
}
```

-----

## Handling View Interaction Events

> A widget can update in response to a user interacting with the deck.gl view the widget is attached to. 

Reviewer: This is easily the most important section and needs its own page IMHO. (I do understand that we have work to do here.)

Reviewer: I've been struggling to port the graph layers controller React component to a widget, I was looking for docs on how to implement zooms and pans

https://github.com/visgl/deck.gl-community/blob/master/modules/graph-layers/src/widgets/view-control-widget.tsx#L325

        removeStyles(el, oldProps.style);
        applyStyles(el, props.style);
      }
    }
    ...
  }

}
```

### CSS Class Prop

Define a prop for adding a CSS class

```ts
interface AwesomeWidgetProps {
  /**
   * Additional CSS class.
   */
  className?: string;
}
```

Apply the CSS class to your widget

```ts
import { type Widget } from '@deck.gl/core'

class AwesomeWidget implements Widget {

  onAdd() {
    const {className} = this.props;
    const element = document.createElement('div');
    if (className) element.classList.add(className);
    ...
  }
  
  setProps(props: Partial<AwesomeWidgetProps>) {
    const oldProps = this.props;
    const el = this.element;
    if (el) {
      if (oldProps.className !== props.className) {
        if (oldProps.className) el.classList.remove(oldProps.className);
        if (props.className) el.classList.add(props.className);
      }
    }
    ...
  }
}
```

### CSS Variables

Define variables in the widget's CSS stylesheet

```css
.my-awesome-widget {
  background-color: var(--primary-color, rebeccapurple);
}
```

Override in user's application

```css
.my-awesome-widget {
    --primary-color: chartreuse;
}
```

> ## Example: Layer List Widget with Preact

Reviewer: Clarify the difference between a preact and a react widget?
Maybe having a separate page for preact?

(Disclaimer: I tried my hand at writing a custom widget and I really liked the ability to use preact internally while still creating a universal component, but I think that is a somewhat tricky distinction for a new user to pick up).

Author: I've write a more basic example in vanilla js here and added a preact page.

Below is a comprehensive example demonstrating a layer list widget implemented using Preact for dynamic UI rendering:

> ```tsx

Reviewer: We should really use MDX capabilities and make these widgets live on the pages...

Author: @Pessimistress suggested I can embed CodePen (e.g. LightingEffect) and found a react template too https://codepen.io/AdventureBear/pen/LYqwbwx

    this.id = props.id || 'layer-list-widget';
    this.placement = props.placement || 'top-left';
    this.viewId = props.viewId || null;

    this.props = { 
      ...props,
      style: props.style || {}
    }
  }

  onAdd({deck}: {deck: Deck<any>}): HTMLDivElement {
    const {style, className} = this.props;
    const element = document.createElement('div');
    element.classList.add('deck-widget', 'deck-widget-zoom');
    if (className) element.classList.add(className);
    applyStyles(element, style);
    this.deck = deck;
    this.element = element;
    this.update();
    return element;
  }

  onRedraw({layers}: {layers: Layer[]}) {
    this.layers = layers;
    this.update();
  }

  onViewportChange(viewport) {
    this.viewports[viewport.id] = viewport
  }

  update() {
    const element = this.element;
    if (!element) {
      return;
    }
    let layers = this.layers
    if (this.deck?.props.layerFilter) {
      const ui = (
        {viewports.values().map(viewport => (
          <div>
            {viewport.id}
            <ul>
              {layers.filter(layer => (
                this.deck?.props.layerFilter({layer, viewport})
              )).map((layer) => {

>                 <li key={layer.id}>{layer.id}</li>

Reviewer 2: Would it be much more code to show how control the layers in some way? For example, have a checkbox next to each layer to toggle visibility in that view?

Author: I can try it.. but controlling anything the user sets starts to get into a territory where user state and internal state can get out of sync. At least, there's nothing preventing user-space from just overriding any changes a widget makes to a layer. And there's some risk of introducing a race condition.

I think what this would look like with our current API is something like:

```
this.deck?.setProps({ layers: layers.map(layer => layer.clone({ visible: isVisible }) })
```

This could cause events to fire in the app that in-turn call `setProps`. Is there a way to draw the layers without alerting the user? Perhaps:
```
this.deck?._drawLayers('layer-list-widget', { layers: ... })
```

## Implementing the Widget Lifecycle Functions

The widget lifecycle functions define how a widget initializes, updates, and cleans up its integration with deck.gl.

### Constructing a Widget

[`constructor(props: PropsT`)] - Initialize the widget's members with a constructor.

```ts
import type { Widget, WidgetPlacement } from '@deck.gl/core'

type AwesomeWidgetProps = {
  id?: string;
  placement?: WidgetPlacement;
  viewId?: string | null;
  style?: Partial<CSSStyleDeclaration>;
}

class AwesomeWidget implements Widget<AwesomeWidgetProps> {
  id = 'awesome-widget';
  props: AwesomeWidgetProps;
  placement: WidgetPlacement = 'top-left';
  viewId?: string | null = null;

  constructor(props: AwesomeWidgetProps) {
    // Required members
    this.id = props.id ?? this.id;
    this.props = {
      ...props,
      // Apply additional defaults
      style: props.style ?? {}
    }

    // Optional members
    this.viewId = props.viewId ?? this.viewId;
    this.placement = props.placement ?? this.placement;
  }
}
```

> Warning: Avoid directly mutating the `props` object. Instead, apply modifications to a copy, e.g. `this.props = {...props, props.style || {}}` 

### Adding a Widget

> [`onAdd({deck, viewId}): HTMLElement?`](../../api-reference/core/widget.md#onadd) - This method provides deck.gl with the root DOM element of your widget. This element is positioned based on `placement` and `viewId` members.

Author: Yes, it's called when the widget is first added.
